# Driven by License

I think there's a case for writing a paper (or maybe even a book) that reviews
the social and economic impact of open source licensing.

*Why is software eating the world? Why is Big Tech becoming so powerful?*

While there are many reasons for the dominance of Big Tech, I suspect few
people would look at it from the perspective of software licensing. I think
it would be rewarding to investigate not only open source in general, but the
impact of transitions we gone through: specifically how the developer community
at large moved from "freeware" to "shareware", then to "GPL", and finally (for
now) to the more permissive licenses like MIT and apache v2.

The narrative of the tech community to outsiders is that "innovation" drives
growth. That's mostly bullshit. Everyone knows that "selling free stuff" makes
the most money. We take free software, add value to it and sell it to the
masses at a premium (still cheap enough to out-compete the non-software
world!). One hypothesis worth checking out is that the revenue in tech is
driven by the quantity and quality of free and open source software, which by
the way, in recent years,  has largely moved from GPL to permissive OSS
licenses due to $many\_reasons (\*cough GPLv3 cough\*).

If that hypothesis has any merit, this Richard M. Stallman dude, certified
PC-non-compliant creep/weirdo, closet socialist advocating for a communistic
vision for software copyrights, seems to have provided essential fuel for
growing the largest multinational corporations we've seen in recent history
that permeates (almost) everyone's lives. The way his vision partially
succeeded -- OSS being ubiquitous ultimately ending up in the form of "leftpad";
and the way his vision partially failed -- the divisive nature of GPLv3 led to
new projects largely abandoning the whole GPL brand altogether in favor of more
permissive licenses, allowed Big Tech to exploit "selling free stuff" and grow
faster than ever before.

I'm not saying that it's a Good Thing or a Bag Thing, but it sure seems like
fate likes putting an ironic twist on things.

