# 2024-01-03

Choice

Choice entails all its consequences

Divine wisdom is required to know it all

And since we are always experiencing the consequences of the choices we have made of free will, there is  no reason to feel aggravated at our circumstances

This is not a call to “accept fate” but merely that the wise must have chosen with knowledge or at least acceptance of the consequences of the choices they made with free will and also with love


# 2024-01-22

- Structure of emotions? Eg. fear. Is there a way to describe fear reductionistically?

- It seems that the set up of using two medium one to speak in angelic language and another to translate could be due to a large gap in so called "frequency" where one body is not sufficient, so two bodies are needed to "step down", kind of like stepping down high voltage electricity using two transformers.

# 2024-01-25

Speculations

The soul is an algorithm. This algorithm takes a subjective world as input, and outputs the next subjective world. 

The persona is a diminished idea of the world processing algorithm focused on a particular set of states. These states are transient. Therefore rationally speaking it’s cannot be our identity.

The conscious being involves feeding the outputs of the algorithm back as the input of the algorithm. (Time is phenomenon of this effect.)

It is universally said that the purpose of us in world is to learn. This is why we are limited in our ability to arbitrarily change either the inputs/outputs or the algorithm. We know from modern machine learning techniques that learning rates must be set to a small value, otherwise the results may overshoot and diverge. Therefore, although we have the ability to change things arbitrarily (aka “free will”), the effect of the change is very limited relatively speaking.


The law of once price

The law of one price seems to be a bastardization (via objectification) of the subjective law of equivalent exchange. The objective law of one price converges, but the subject reality is true always.

The law of equivalent exchange is not a law of the objective universe in the sense that you can only transform one thing to another if they are somehow equivalent, but that subjectively what you exchange is deemed equivalent, and the subjective truth reigns supreme in terms of reality. Also, whatever you give you receive.


# 2024-01-28

Interpretation of messages

The same idea can be represented (truly) in various tones. For example, there is a story that the earth is a prison for those who have committed crimes in other worlds (from alien crash notes, need to find the name). It is also said that earth is a school, a tough one at that (eg. Dr Peebles channel, next soul podcast @ Jan 27), because souls who have forgotten who they are need to learn. This is basically the same message.

The traditional stories about the “devil” is quite illuminating - we know that they call whatever is not recognized by the Church as of the “devil”, but in all likelihood there must have been some non-dark beings as well. The stories about the “devil” are that they very much like contracts and also generally dont lie, but occasionally deceive by withholding information. It does have some resemblances to modern spirits via channellers, except the “deception” may only be a side effect of misunderstanding messages due to human limitations. Withholding information seems to be common occurrence though.

# 2024-01-30

Why do we project?

Why? If we are just making decisions, why are we evolved to conjure up situations and make decisions for those imagined situations as well?

It seems fleshing out imagined scenarios would assist us in making good decisions, but it seems we are conjuring up scenarios also to “train” ourselves to practice how to react.. this does not seem to be productive at the times when our projection is inaccurate.

How many brain cycles are wasted on inaccurate projections?


# 2024-01-31

Breath is coercion, and by volunteering to breathe intentionally we transcend(?) the coercion ... ?

# 2024-02-20

Freedom from the past

If we believe the future is not fixed so as to make ourselves free from a predetermined future, then we should be able to also believe the past is not fixed to allow ourselves to be free from the past

自然 - 道法自然

雖然「好明顯」「自然」係同「萬物本自有嘅神」同一意思 (英文好興稱之為 "all that is")，但唔知點解修辭上又好似唔係好通順咁。



# 2024-02-21

Subjective truth and ignorance

Objective truth presupposes cosmic determination, and blames people for contradictions due to people’s ignorance of what has determined to be.

Subjective truth embraces celebrates our “ignorance” as possibilities not yet determined.

Only with humility can we learn and experience.

