# Speculative Stories

## 倉頡 vs Thoth

- Wikipedia: `The Egyptian pronunciation of ḏḥwty is not fully known, but may be reconstructed as *ḏiḥautī, perhaps pronounced *[t͡ʃʼi.ˈħau.tʰiː] or *[ci.ˈħau.tʰiː]. This reconstruction is based on the Ancient Greek borrowing Thōth ([tʰɔːtʰ]) or Theut and the fact that the name was transliterated into Sahidic Coptic variously as ⲑⲟⲟⲩⲧ Thoout, ⲑⲱⲑ Thōth, ⲑⲟⲟⲧ Thoot, ⲑⲁⲩⲧ Thaut, Taautos (Τααυτος), Thoor (Θωωρ), as well as Bohairic Coptic ⲑⲱⲟⲩⲧ Thōout. These spellings reflect known sound changes from earlier Egyptian such as the loss of ḏ palatalization and merger of ḥ with h i.e. initial ḏḥ > th > tʰ.[8] The loss of pre-Coptic final y/j is also common.[9] Following Egyptological convention, which eschews vowel reconstruction, the consonant skeleton ḏḥwty would be rendered "Djehuti" and the god is sometimes found under this name. However, the Greek form "Thoth" is more common.`
- https://academic-accelerator.com/encyclopedia/thoth `The Egyptian pronunciation of ḏḥwty is not completely known, but it has been reconstructed as *ḏiḥautī, possibly pronounced *[t͡ʃʼi.ˈħau.tʰiː] or *[ci.ˈħau.tʰiː] . This rebuilding is translated in various ways, such as the borrowing of the ancient Greek tote ([tʰɔːtʰ]) or theut, and the name of the Saahidan Copto, ⲑⲟⲟⲩⲧ Thout, ⲑⲱⲑ Thout, ⲑⲟⲟⲧ THAUT, TAAUTOS. It is based on the fact that (Τααυτος), Thor (Θωωρ) ), and Bohair Coptic ⲑⲱⲟⲩⲧ Thouout. These spellings reflect known sound changes from early Egyptian, such as the loss of ḏpalatalization and the fusion of ḥ and hi, the initials ḏḥ > th > tʰ. The final pre-Coptic y/j is often lost. Following the practice of Egyptology, which avoids vowel restructuring, the consonantal skeleton ḏḥwty is translated as "Jefti," and God is sometimes seen by this name. However, the Greek form "Thoth" is more common. According to Theodor Hopfner, the Egyptian name for Thoth, written ḏḥwty, is derived from ḏḥw, and is claimed to be the oldest known name for an ibis, and is usually written as hbj. has been written. Adding -ty indicates that it has the Ibis attribute. According to this interpretation, therefore, the name Thoth means "one who is like an ibis." Other forms of the name ḏḥwty using older transcriptions include Jehuti, Jehuty, Tahuti, Tehuti, Zehuti, Techu, or Tetu. As well as the title of Pharaoh, several titles of Thoth are also known, including A, Sheps, Lord of Khemennu, Asten, Khenti, Mehi, Hab, and A'an. Additionally, Thoth is also known for certain aspects of himself. For example, the moon god Ia Djehuti (j3ḥ-ḏḥw.ty), who represents the entire moon. The Greeks associated Thoth with their god Hermes due to its similar attributes and functions. One of Thoth's titles, ``Three Great Men,'' was translated into Greek τρισμέγιστος (Trismegistos), becoming Hermes Trismegistus.`
- https://www.occult.live/index.php?title=Thoth - `According to Theodor Hopfner, Thoth's Egyptian name written as ḏḥwty originated from ḏḥw, claimed to be the oldest known name for the ibis, normally written as hbj. The addition of -ty denotes that he possessed the attributes of the ibis. Hence Thoth's name would mean "He who is like the ibis," according to this interpretation. The name was transliterated into Sahidic Coptic variously as Thoout or Thōth. These spellings reflect known sound changes from earlier Egyptian such as the loss of ḏ palatalization and merger of ḥ with h. Following Egyptological convention, which eschews vowel reconstruction, the consonant skeleton ḏḥwty would be rendered "Djehuti" and the god is sometimes found under this name. However, the Greek form "Thoth" is more common.`

- 《康熙字典》：【唐韻】七岡切【集韻】千岡切，音蒼。
- 《康熙字典》：【唐韻】【正韻】胡結切【集韻】【韻會】奚結切，音纈。
- 《說文》：倉頡之初作書，蓋依類象形，故謂之文。其後形聲相益，即謂之字。文者，物象之本；字者，言孳乳而寖多也。著於竹帛謂之書。書者，如也。以迄五帝三王之世，改易殊體，封於泰山者七十有二代，靡有同焉。
- 《說文》：黃帝史官倉頡，見鳥獸蹄迒之跡，知分理之可相別異也

啲音勉強可能係有啲似，尤其係 /cʼVˈħawtij/ 呢啲 interpretation。
